HW06 Reading Responses
- MY SUMMARY -
Before I start off with the summarizing, I wanted to briefly mention that there was something really “calming” about this whole video.
Maybe it was the no-background-music aesthetic, or maybe just Berger’s voice, but this video was deeply relaxing, yet highly informative and insightful.
John Berger’s 1972 video, Ways of Seeing, is a first of four programs wherein he questions some of the assumptions made about the tradition of European painting; the tradition that was born around 1400, and died around 1900.
He states that this isn’t much about the paintings themselves, but rather, about people’s perspectives and their respective perceptions.
He goes on to mention that the process of “seeing” is less spontaneous and natural than one tends to believe, and that it largely depends on habit and convention.
The video then shifts to a third-person POV of an old camera, explaining what all actions it performs.
“My way leads towards the creation of a fresh perception of the world. Thus I explain, in a new way, a world unknown to you.”
I loved this quote from the video, and especially the first-person narratives of the camera from Dziga Vertov’s 1923 manifesto.
Moving ahead, Berger examines the impact of photography on our appreciation of art and paintings from the past.
He mentions that the camera can make them (paintings) available at any size, anywhere, and for any purpose of our choosing, unlike the human eye which can be in only one place at a time.
He provides a live example of Boticelli’s painting, Venus & Mars, by showing them on the camera.
He exclaims how “paintings were an integral part of the building for which they were designed, or were records of their interior life and made up their ‘memory’. Everything around the painting confirms and consolidates its meaning.”.
He further states that the painting’s meaning have become “transmit-able”, and that the “days of the pilgrimage are over” for people to go out and see those paintings.
I’m not quite sure if I agree to this point of his.
Yes, it’s true that with the advent of the camera, screens and the Internet, paintings have become accessible to all and sundry, but the originals still attract audiences & art lovers from all around the globe to their respective “unique painted surfaces”.
I mean, just have a look at the footfall The Mona Lisa receives! (it’s around 10 million people annually)
He does indeed address the question of the original painting’s uniqueness, and how the majority of reproductions & facsimiles consist of distortions.
I liked how he shows the National Gallery’s catalogue for the Virgin of the Rocks by Leonardo Da Vinci, and how densely written it is to prove the genuineness of the painting.
Was quite surprised to know that the Louvre has a replica instead, and how the French art historians had tried to prove that that was the original!
Berger then states that the camera has multiplied the paintings’ possible meanings, but destroyed its original meaning, which essentially leads to easy manipulation.
He states that those can be used to make arguments & points that’re completely different from their original meaning, and goes on to demonstrate how simple camera movements can change their meaning, or how the addition of music & rhythm could also subtly manipulate the paintings’ meanings.
I couldn’t help but marvel at the true-ness of his statements. This instantly made me think of all the Instagram memes that depict comical scenarios using olden paintings.
Just as I was drawing up these parallels, Berger does something similar with the Caravaggio painting. Also, I was today years old when I learnt that it’s pronounced “Van Goff” and not “Van Go”!
Berger also says that “the meaning of an image can be changed according to what you see besides it, or what comes after it.” He proceeds to depict how authors or “art experts” tend to resort to meaningless generalizations, and impose their own opinions onto other people.
He contrasts these views with how children interpret paintings, and how they tend to relate them more to their own personal experiences.
I found Berger’s attitude towards the children really interesting. I feel, had it been an “art expert” here instead of him, they’d probably be quite disappointed & discomforted by how all the children got the painting’s meaning “wrong”.
He concludes by commenting how the kids, without knowing any details about the painting or about Caravaggio’s life, were able to grasp the sexual ambivalence of the primary figure.
I feel his parting words of this episode, “I hope you consider what I arranged, but be skeptical of it” couldn’t be any truer in today’s world of social media as well.
I feel everything we see on social media is edited and distorted to persuade us to consider it as reality. I couldn’t help but wonder how Berger would feel about today’s Internet & online-heavy life.
- FINISH -